Add task "Collect K8s logs" in the docs (#981)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/tasks/collect-logs-in-kubernetes.md

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/tasks/collect-logs-in-kubernetes/
description: Learn how to collect and forward logs from Kubernetes to Loki
title: Collect and forward Kubernetes logs
weight: 200
---

> # Collect logs and forward Kubernetes logs

Reviewer: If we want a short title in the TOC, use `menuTitle` for the TOC and `title` for the more descriptive title... which, as Paulin said, must match the heading 1.

You can configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to collect logs and forward them to a [Loki][] database.

This topic describes how to:

* Configure logs delivery.
* Collect logs from Kubernetes Pods.

## Components used in this topic

> * [discovery.kubernetes]
> * [discovery.relabel]
> * [local.file_match]
> * [loki.source.file]
> * [loki.source.kubernetes]
> * [loki.source.kubernetes_events]
> * [loki.process]
> * [loki.write]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [discovery.kubernetes][]
* [discovery.relabel][]
* [local.file_match][]
* [loki.source.file][]
* [loki.source.kubernetes][]
* [loki.source.kubernetes_events][]
* [loki.process][]
* [loki.write][]
```

Not a hard requirement, but suggesting the change for consistency with other topic syntax/style.

## Before you begin

> * Ensure that you have basic familiarity with logs labelling when working with Loki.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ensure that you are familiar with logs labelling when working with Loki.
```

* Identify where you will write collected logs.

>   Logs can be written to Loki endpoints such as Grafana Loki, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise Logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can write logs to Loki endpoints such as Grafana Loki, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise Logs.
```

* Be familiar with the concept of [Components][] in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.

## Configure logs delivery

Before components can collect logs, you must have a component responsible for writing those logs somewhere.

> The [loki.write][] component is responsible for delivering logs to a Loki endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [loki.write][] component delivers logs to a Loki endpoint.
```

Simplify the sentence a little.

After a `loki.write` component is defined, you can use other {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} components to forward logs to it.

To configure a `loki.write` component for logs delivery, complete the following steps:

1. Add the following `loki.write` component to your configuration file.

   ```alloy
   loki.write "<LABEL>" {
     endpoint {
       url = "<LOKI_URL>"
     }
   }
   ```

   Replace the following:

   - _`<LABEL>`_: The label for the component, such as `default`.
     The label you use must be unique across all `loki.write` components in the same configuration file.

>    - _`<LOKI_URL>`_ The full URL of the Loki endpoint where logs will be sent, such as `https://logs-us-central1.grafana.net/loki/api/v1/push`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - _`<LOKI_URL>`_ : The full URL of the Loki endpoint where logs will be sent, such as `https://logs-us-central1.grafana.net/loki/api/v1/push`.
```

> 1. If your endpoint requires basic authentication, paste the following inside the `endpoint` block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. If your endpoint requires basic authentication, paste the following inside the `endpoint` block.
```
This should be a sub-point to the `loki.write` one?

   ```alloy
   basic_auth {
     username = "<USERNAME>"
     password = "<PASSWORD>"
   }
   ```

   Replace the following:

   - _`<USERNAME>`_: The basic authentication username.
   - _`<PASSWORD>`_: The basic authentication password or API key.

> 1. If you have more than one endpoint to write logs to, repeat the `endpoint` block for additional endpoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. If you have more than one endpoint to write logs to, repeat the `endpoint` block for additional endpoints.
```
This is a sub-point?

> The following example demonstrates configuring `loki.write` with multiple endpoints, mixed usage of basic authentication, and a `loki.source.file` component that forwards logs to Loki.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following simple example demonstrates configuring `loki.write` with multiple endpoints, mixed usage of basic authentication, 
and a `loki.source.file` component that collects logs from the filesystem on Alloy's own container.
```

> The following example demonstrates configuring `loki.write` with multiple endpoints and mixed usage of basic authentication, and a `loki.source.file` component which forwards logs to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates configuring `loki.write` with multiple endpoints, mixed usage of basic authentication, and a `loki.source.file` component that forwards logs to it.
```

What is the `it` here? Is it `loki.write`?

Author: I believe it's Loki (as the database). It's a copy paste from Prometheus task.

Reviewer: OK, then we could replace `it` with `Loki`.

```alloy
loki.write "default" {
  endpoint {
    url = "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push"
  }

  endpoint {
    url = "https://logs-us-central1.grafana.net/loki/api/v1/push"

    // Get basic authentication based on environment variables.
    basic_auth {

>       username = env("<REMOTE_WRITE_USERNAME>")
>       password = env("<REMOTE_WRITE_PASSWORD>")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      username = "<USERNAME>"
      password = "<PASSWORD>"
```

    }
  }
}

loki.source.file "example" {
  // Collect logs from the default listen address.
  targets = [
    {__path__ = "/tmp/foo.txt", "color" = "pink"},
    {__path__ = "/tmp/bar.txt", "color" = "blue"},
    {__path__ = "/tmp/baz.txt", "color" = "grey"},
  ]

  forward_to = [loki.write.default.receiver]
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Replace the following:

   - _`<USERNAME>`_: The remote write username.
   - _`<PASSWORD>`_: The remote write password.

```

We should define the replaceable elements everywhere we use them.  I'm guessing these are remote write and not basic?

For more information on configuring logs delivery, refer to [loki.write][].

## Collect logs from Kubernetes

> {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} can be configured to collect all kind of logs from Kubernetes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} can be configured to collect all kinds of logs from Kubernetes:
```

1. System logs
1. Pods logs
1. Kubernetes Events

Thanks to the component architecture, you can follow one or all of the next sections to get those logs. Once you have followed the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) to ensure collected logs can be written somewhere, jump to the relevant sections.

### System logs

To get the system logs, you should use the following components:

> 1. [local.file_match][]: Discovers files on the local filesystem
> 1. [loki.source.file][]: Reads log entries from files
> 1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [local.file_match][]: Discovers files on the local filesystem.
1. [loki.source.file][]: Reads log entries from files.
1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section.
```
@clayton-cornell I think these sentences should end with periods?

Here is an example using those stages.

```alloy

> // local.file_match discovers files on the local filesystem using glob patterns and the doublestar library. Expose an array of file path.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what the intent of ` Expose an array of file path.` is here. Is this an instruction? or is there something missing from the sentence?

Author: I think the intent is to say that the component doesn't act, it just export a list of files for the next components to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// local.file_match discovers files on the local filesystem using glob patterns and the doublestar library. It returns an array of file paths.
```

Is this still accurate then?

local.file_match "node_logs" {
  path_targets = [{
      // Monitor syslog to scrape node-logs
      __path__  = "/var/log/syslog",
      job       = "node/syslog",
      node_name = env("HOSTNAME"),
      cluster   = <CLUSTER_NAME>
  }]
}

// loki.source.file reads log entries from files and forwards them to other loki.* components.

> // Multiple loki.source.file components can be specified by giving them different labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// You can specify multiple loki.source.file components by giving them different labels.
```

loki.source.file "node_logs" {
  targets    = local.file_match.node_logs.targets
  forward_to = [loki.write.<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>.receiver]
}
```

Replace the following values:

> - _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this sepcific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this specific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.
```

- _`<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>`_: The name of your `loki.write` component, such as `default`.

### Pods logs

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}

> You can get pods logs through the log files on each node. In this guide, you will get the logs through the Kubernetes API because it doesn't require system privileges for {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, as the [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.source.kubernetes/) for `loki.source.kubernetes` state:

> Because loki.source.kubernetes uses the Kubernetes API to tail logs, it uses more network traffic and CPU consumption of Kubelets than loki.source.file.

Do you think we should mention both `loki.source.kubernetes` and `loki.source.file` in the doc? I'm worried that folks with high traffic will attempt to use the wrong component.

> It's possible to get pods logs through the log files on each of the nodes. In this guide, we will get the logs through the Kubernetes API as it doesn't require system privileges for {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get pods logs through the log files on each node. In this guide, you will get the logs through the Kubernetes API because it doesn't require system privileges for {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.
```

{{< /admonition >}}

The following components are needed:

> 1. [discovery.kubernetes]: Discover pods information and list them for future components to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [discovery.kubernetes][]: Discover pods information and list them for future components to use
```

1. [discovery.relabel][]: Enforce relabelling strategies on the list of pods
1. [loki.source.kubernetes][]: Tails logs from a list of Kubernetes pods targets
1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component
1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section

Here is an example using those stages:

```alloy
// discovery.kubernetes allows you to find scrape targets from Kubernetes resources.

> // It watches cluster state, and ensures targets are continually synced with what is currently running in your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// It watches cluster state and ensures targets are continually synced with what is currently running in your cluster.
```

  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kubernetes_namespace", "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name"]
    action = "replace"
    target_label = "job"
    separator = "/"
    replacement = "$1"
  }

  // Label creation - "container" field from "__meta_kubernetes_pod_uid" and "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name"
  // Concatenate values __meta_kubernetes_pod_uid/__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name.log
  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_uid", "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name"]
    action = "replace"
    target_label = "__path__"
    separator = "/"
    replacement = "/var/log/pods/*$1/*.log"
  }

  // Label creation -  "container_runtime" field from "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_id"
  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_id"]
    action = "replace"
    target_label = "container_runtime"
    regex = "^(\\S+):\\/\\/.+$"
    replacement = "$1"
  }
}

// loki.source.kubernetes tails logs from Kubernetes containers using the Kubernetes API.
loki.source.kubernetes "pod_logs" {
  targets    = discovery.relabel.pod_logs.output
  forward_to = [loki.process.pod_logs.receiver]
}

> // loki.process receives log entries from other loki components, applies one or more processing stages,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// loki.process receives log entries from other Loki components, applies one or more processing stages,
```

// and forwards the results to the list of receivers in the component’s arguments.
loki.process "pod_logs" {
  stage.static_labels {
      values = {
        cluster = "<CLUSTER_NAME>",
      }
  }

  forward_to = [loki.write.<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>.receiver]
}
```

Replace the following values:

> - _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this sepcific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this specific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.
```

- _`<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>`_: The name of your `loki.write` component, such as `default`.

### Kubernetes Cluster Events

The following components are needed:

1. [loki.source.kubernetes_events][]: Tails events from Kubernetes API
1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component
1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section

Here is an example using those stages:

```alloy
// loki.source.kubernetes_events tails events from the Kubernetes API and converts them

> // into log lines to forward to other loki components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// into log lines to forward to other Loki components.
```

loki.source.kubernetes_events "cluster_events" {
  job_name   = "integrations/kubernetes/eventhandler"
  log_format = "logfmt"
  forward_to = [
    loki.process.cluster_events.receiver,
  ]
}

// loki.process receives log entries from other loki components, applies one or more processing stages,
// and forwards the results to the list of receivers in the component’s arguments.
loki.process "cluster_events" {
  forward_to = [loki.write.<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>.receiver]

  stage.static_labels {
    values = {
      cluster = "<CLUSTER_NAME>",
    }
  }

  stage.labels {
    values = {
      kubernetes_cluster_events = "job",
    }
  }
}
```

Replace the following values:

> - _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this sepcific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this specific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.
```

- _`<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>`_: The name of your `loki.write` component, such as `default`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible to add an example k8s configuration too, please? E.g. something similar to the example config here:
https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol.exporter.loadbalancing/#kubernetes-resolver

It could demonstrate that we need to store a positions file in a persistent way so that if Alloy is restarted, it can read it again.

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/tasks/collect-logs-in-kubernetes/
description: Learn how to collect logs on Kubernetes and forward them to Loki

> title: Collect logs on Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
menuTitle: Collect logs on Kubernetes
title:  Collect logs and forward Kubernetes logs
```

weight: 375
---

> # Collect logs and forward Kubernetes logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Collect Kubernetes logs and forward them to Loki
```

local.file_match "node_logs" {
  path_targets = [{
      // Monitor syslog to scrape node-logs
      __path__  = "/var/log/syslog",
      job       = "node/syslog",
      node_name = env("HOSTNAME"),
      cluster   = <CLUSTER_NAME>
  }]
}

// loki.source.file reads log entries from files and forwards them to other loki.* components.
// You can specify multiple loki.source.file components by giving them different labels.
loki.source.file "node_logs" {
  targets    = local.file_match.node_logs.targets
  forward_to = [loki.write.<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>.receiver]
}
```

Replace the following values:

- _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this specific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.
- _`<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>`_: The name of your `loki.write` component, such as `default`.

### Pods logs

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
You can get pods logs through the log files on each node. In this guide, you will get the logs through the Kubernetes API because it doesn't require system privileges for {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.
{{< /admonition >}}

The following components are needed:

> 1. [discovery.kubernetes][]: Discover pods information and list them for future components to use
> 1. [discovery.relabel][]: Enforce relabelling strategies on the list of pods
> 1. [loki.source.kubernetes][]: Tails logs from a list of Kubernetes pods targets
> 1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component
> 1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [discovery.kubernetes][]: Discover pods information and list them for future components to use.
1. [discovery.relabel][]: Enforce relabelling strategies on the list of pods.
1. [loki.source.kubernetes][]: Tails logs from a list of Kubernetes pods targets.
1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component.
1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section.
```

  }

  // Label creation -  "container_runtime" field from "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_id"
  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_id"]
    action = "replace"
    target_label = "container_runtime"
    regex = "^(\\S+):\\/\\/.+$"
    replacement = "$1"
  }
}

// loki.source.kubernetes tails logs from Kubernetes containers using the Kubernetes API.
loki.source.kubernetes "pod_logs" {
  targets    = discovery.relabel.pod_logs.output
  forward_to = [loki.process.pod_logs.receiver]
}

// loki.process receives log entries from other Loki components, applies one or more processing stages,
// and forwards the results to the list of receivers in the component’s arguments.
loki.process "pod_logs" {
  stage.static_labels {
      values = {
        cluster = "<CLUSTER_NAME>",
      }
  }

  forward_to = [loki.write.<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>.receiver]
}
```

Replace the following values:

- _`<CLUSTER_NAME>`_: The label for this specific Kubernetes cluster, such as `production` or `us-east-1`.
- _`<WRITE_COMPONENT_NAME>`_: The name of your `loki.write` component, such as `default`.

### Kubernetes Cluster Events

The following components are needed:

> 1. [loki.source.kubernetes_events][]: Tails events from Kubernetes API
> 1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component
> 1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [loki.source.kubernetes_events][]: Tails events from Kubernetes API.
1. [loki.process][]: Modify the logs before sending them to the next component.
1. [loki.write][]: Send logs to the Loki endpoint. You should have configured it in the [Configure logs delivery](#configure-logs-delivery) section.
```
